Heritage Oak Dental
Home
About
Resources
Specials
Services
Call (916) 626-4050
Home
/
Services
/
Orthodontics
Orthodontics in Rocklin, CA
Straighten your teeth and perfect your smile with modern orthodontic solutions

Orthodontics is the practice in correcting misalignments of the teeth and jaw. There are many debilitating problems associated with misalignment, for example, speech defects, difficulties chewing and difficulty maintaining adequate oral hygiene.

Common Issues Orthodontics Successfully Solves
Anteroposterior deviations
Common examples include underbite (lower teeth positioned further forward than upper teeth) and overbite (upper teeth positioned further forward than lower teeth). Both can cause difficulty articulating and chewing.

Overcrowding
One of the most common problems orthodontics address. Lack of jawbone space means adult teeth cannot erupt in alignment with existing teeth. The orthodontist can realign the teeth using a number of unobtrusive devices and treatments.

Aesthetic issues
In some cases, the shape of the whole face is negatively impacted by malocclusions or a bad bite. The dentist can restructure and realign the jaw, lips and teeth to create a beautiful, even smile.

Why Straighten Teeth?
Straighter teeth perform chewing, biting and speaking functions more effectively than crooked teeth. In addition, a straight smile boosts confidence, is aesthetically pleasing to look at, and can help stave off a wide variety of dental ailments.

Disorders Associated with Crooked Teeth:
•
Periodontitis: Crooked teeth are hard to clean effectively, leading to plaque buildup and gum disease
•
TMJ Disorder: Improper jaw alignment causes painful conditions with severe headaches and jaw pain
•
Tooth injury: Crooked teeth are weaker and often protrude, making them more vulnerable to injury
•
Uneven wear: Some teeth work harder than others, leading to faster wear and damage
Treatment Options

Traditional Braces
These braces are strong and tend not to stain the teeth. They are comprised of individual brackets which are cemented to each tooth and accompanied by an archwire which constantly asserts gentle pressure on the teeth. Traditional braces are generally metal but are also available in a clear synthetic material and "tooth colored" ceramic.

The ceramic brackets are generally more comfortable than the metal alternative, but can become discolored by coffee, wine, smoking and certain foods. Not all patients are candidates for traditional braces.


Invisalign®
Invisalign is a series of clear, removable teeth aligners that dentists use as an alternative to traditional metal dental braces. Sure, there are other options out there for straightening your teeth, but none offers the level of comfort, convenience and confidence that you will find with Invisalign.

What is not to love about this cutting edge approach to treatment? Clear aligners are favored by many adults because they are both removable and invisible to onlookers.

The aligners are clear trays that should be worn for the recommended amount of time each day for the quickest results. Aligners are more comfortable and less obtrusive than traditional braces, but also tend to extend treatment time and requires strict use. Not all patients are candidates for clear aligner technology.


ClearCorrect Invisible Braces
ClearCorrect invisible braces are the clear and simple way to straighten your teeth so you can show off your smile! With ClearCorrect, your dentist can straighten your teeth using a series of clear, custom, removable aligners. Each aligner moves your teeth just a little bit at a time until you eventually get straight teeth.

The ClearCorrect system is affordable and your doctor will likely have payment options to suit your needs. Cleaning and caring for your teeth won't change, and once you begin your treatment you can eat whatever you want.

Because ClearCorrect is so clear and easy to remove, treatment has low or no impact on the way you look and your daily routines. ClearCorrect can help you achieve your best smile whether your teeth are crowded or spaced. It can correct most overbites and underbites and can straighten and align teeth that are crooked or turned.


Damon® Braces
The Damon® System is an innovative new way to straighten the teeth quickly and comfortably. Traditional dental braces are comprised of large metal brackets and a wide variety of elastics. Damon® Braces straighten teeth up to six months quicker than traditional braces and leave teeth healthy and beautiful.

Why Choose Damon® Braces?
Damon® Braces utilize a unique type of technology to optimize the straightening process. Traditional archwires are replaced with lighter, shape-memory, self-ligating wires that need no tightening. There are no elastics, no ties and no palate expanders.

The Damon® System reduces the amount of friction each tooth feels by incorporating a sliding mechanism. Teeth can move gently into alignment without discomfort. Prior to the adhesion of traditional braces, a tooth or multiple teeth often need to be removed to create space. Damon® Braces can be affixed without the removal of healthy teeth.


Fast Smile System
The Fast Smile system offers quicker and more efficient treatment times than traditional dental braces. In fact, Fast Smile braces can reduce the overall treatment times by as much as 40%. Though the majority of people love the thought of straight, healthy teeth, most do not relish the prospect of spending several years wearing braces.

Contrary to popular belief, Fast Smile does not move the teeth more quickly. The teeth move with added precision at the same speed. The Fast Smile technologies allow the dentist to view the teeth in 3D from every angle, and then plan treatment accordingly. Treatment can be tailored to fit your needs including the upper teeth, lower teeth, or just the front teeth. We recommend treating both arches for the longest lasting result.

Braces for Children
Many children are ambivalent about getting braces. The good news is that the placement of orthodontic braces is not at all painful, and the end result will be a beautiful straight smile.

Although patients of any age can benefit from orthodontic braces, they tend to work much quicker on pre-teens and teenagers since they are still experiencing jaw growth.

Common Causes of Misalignment:
•
Mouth breathing
•
Thumb or finger sucking
•
Prolonged pacifier use
•
Poor oral hygiene
•
Poor nutrition
Braces for Adults
Orthodontic braces were historically associated with teenagers. Today, an increasing number of adults are choosing to wear braces to straighten their teeth and correct bad bites. In fact, it is now estimated that almost one third of all current orthodontic patients are adults.

An adult can experience the same beautiful end results as a teenager, but treatment often takes longer due to the density of the bone and use of growth modification.

Benefits of Straight Teeth:
•
Reduction in general tooth decay
•
Decreased likelihood of periodontal disease
•
Decreased likelihood of tooth injury
•
Reduction in digestive disorders
•
Reduction in orofacial pain
Do Braces Hurt?
One of the most commonly asked questions about dental braces is whether placing them causes any pain or discomfort. The honest answer is that braces do not hurt at all when they are applied to the teeth, so there is no reason to be anxious.

In most cases, there may be mild soreness or discomfort after the orthodontic wire is engaged into the brackets, which may last for a few days.

Timeline:
•
Placement day: Not painful at all. May take longer to eat meals as you adjust
•
Two days after: Slightly uncomfortable as teeth begin realignment. Use relief wax
•
Five days after: Any discomfort should be completely gone. Normal eating can resume
Foods to Avoid with Braces
When you have braces, it is important to take care of them and not break anything. When a part of your braces breaks, your teeth can stop moving and sometimes can even move the wrong way! Fast treatment and a great smile are your rewards for following these guidelines.

❌ Hard Foods (Will Break Braces)
• Ice – Do not chew on ice!
• Nuts
• Corn on the Cob
• Popcorn
• Hard Candy
• Bagels & Hard Pretzels
• Apples or Carrots (unless cut into small pieces)
❌ Sticky Foods (Will Pull Braces Apart)
• Taffy
• Caramels
• Gummy Bears
• Any sticky candy
• Gum
⚠️ High Sugar Foods
Braces make it harder to keep teeth clean. Sugar feeds bacteria that cause cavities. If you eat sugary foods, brush immediately!

⚠️ Acidic Foods
Can cause permanent stains and damage. Avoid:

• Sodas (even diet sodas)
• Lemons and lemon juice
Retainers
When braces are removed, the "retention" phase begins. The objective is to ensure the teeth do not regress back to their previous position. A retainer is a fixed or removable dental appliance custom-made to fit the teeth. Retainers are generally made from transparent plastic and thin wires to optimize comfort.

Hawley Retainer
Metal wire on an acrylic arch. The wire may be adjusted by the dentist to ensure teeth stay in desired position.

Essix Retainer
Clear PVC trays that fit over the entire arch. More affordable and less noticeable than Hawley retainers.

Fixed Retainers
A single wire affixed to the tongue side of teeth. Used when there has been rapid or substantial tooth movement.

Important Retainer Care Tips:
•
Don't lose it: Always place in case while eating or brushing
•
Don't drink while wearing: Increases acid exposure to teeth
•
Don't eat while wearing: Can damage the device and trap food
•
Clean properly: Use toothbrush for Hawley, denture cleaner for clear retainers
•
Wear as directed: Critical for success. Failure can lead to teeth returning to original position
The Three Phases of Orthodontic Treatment
Generally, orthodontic treatment takes between six and thirty months to complete. The treatment time will largely depend on the classification of malocclusion, the type of dental devices used, and the perseverance of the patient.

Phase 1: The Planning Stage
The dentist makes an exact diagnosis to realign the teeth most effectively. First visits may include:

• Medical and dental evaluations
• Study models of your teeth
• Panoramic X-rays
• Computer generated images
• Before/during/after photographs
Phase 2: The Active Phase
Records are used to develop a customized treatment plan. The dentist will recommend custom orthodontic devices to gently move teeth into proper alignment. This may be fixed braces, removable devices like Invisalign, or headgear. Regular adjustments ensure adequate pressure is applied to the teeth.

Phase 3: The Retention Phase
When teeth are correctly aligned, braces are removed. A custom retainer ensures teeth don't shift back to original positions. The jawbone will reform around realigned teeth to fully stabilize them. Retention is the final and permanent phase, though the amount of time to wear can be as little as two nights a week.

Ready to Start Your Orthodontic Journey?
Schedule a consultation to discuss the best orthodontic treatment options for your smile.

Call (916) 626-4050
Heritage Oak Dental - Dentist in Rocklin CA
Your trusted family dentist in Rocklin, CA providing comprehensive dental care for patients of all ages.

3700 Atherton Rd
Rocklin, CA 95765
(916) 626-4050
contactus@heritageoakdental.com
Mon-Thu: 7:30AM-6PM
Fri: 8AM-4PM*
Quick Links
Home
About Our Dentists
Dental Services
Contact Us
FAQ
Patient Resources
Savings Plan
Our Services
General Dentistry
Cosmetic Dentistry
Dental Implants
Orthodontics
Pediatric Dentistry
Oral Surgery
Sedation Dentistry
Periodontics
Connect With Us
Serving
Rocklin • Roseville • Granite Bay • Lincoln • Loomis • Auburn • Citrus Heights

© 2026 Heritage Oak Dental. All rights reserved.

Heritage Oak Dental • 3700 Atherton Rd, Rocklin, CA 95765 • (916) 626-4050

Web presence created by GreyWhale