Heritage Oak Dental
Home
About
Resources
Specials
Services
Call (916) 626-4050
Home
/
Services
/
Pediatric Dentistry
Pediatric Dentistry
Comprehensive dental care for children from birth through adolescence

Pediatric dentistry primarily focuses on children from birth through adolescence. At Heritage Oak Dental we want to care for your whole family. We are concerned with the oral care for all children and even those with special needs so please bring the whole family in.

When Should My Child First See a Dentist?
Dentists fulfill many important functions pertaining to the child's overall oral health and hygiene. They place particular emphasis on the proper maintenance and care of deciduous (baby) teeth, which are instrumental in facilitating good chewing habits, proper speech production, and also hold space for permanent teeth.

Education
Dentists educate the child using models, computer technology, and child-friendly terminology; emphasizing the importance of keeping teeth strong and healthy.

Prevention
Helping establish sound eating and oral care habits, applying dental sealants and fluoride, and providing good demonstrations of brushing and flossing.

👁
Monitoring Growth
By continuously tracking growth and development, dentists can anticipate dental issues and quickly intervene before they worsen.

+
Intervention
In cases of oral injury, malocclusion, or bruxism, space maintainers may be fitted, a nighttime mouth guard may be recommended, or reconstructive surgery may be scheduled.

Common Pediatric Dental Topics

Baby Bottle Tooth Decay
Maintaining the health of primary or baby teeth is exceptionally important. Baby teeth aid in speech development and enunciation, help the child to chew food correctly, maintain space in the jaw for adult teeth, and prevent the tongue from posturing abnormally in the mouth.

Babies are at risk for tooth decay as soon as the first primary tooth emerges, usually around the age of six months. The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) recommends a "well baby check up" with a dentist around the age of twelve months.

What is baby bottle tooth decay?
The term "baby bottle tooth decay" refers to early childhood caries or cavities, which occur in infants and toddlers. Baby bottle tooth decay may affect any or all of the teeth, but is most prevalent in the front teeth on the upper jaw.

The most prominent cause is frequent exposure to sweetened liquids including breast milk, baby formula, juice, and sweetened water. Especially when used as a naptime or nighttime drink, they remain in the mouth for an extended period of time.

Prevention at Home:
•
Cleanse gums after every feeding with a clean washcloth or toothbrush
•
Try not to transmit bacteria via saliva exchange. Rinse pacifiers in clean water
•
Use appropriate toothbrush with ADA-approved toothpaste when teeth begin to emerge
•
Do not place sugary drinks in baby bottles. Only fill with water, breast milk, or formula
•
Do not allow child to take liquid-filled bottle to bed (use water only if necessary)
•
Clean your child's teeth until age seven when they can reach all areas

Home Care for Your Child's Teeth
Pediatric oral care has two main components: preventative care at the dentist's office and preventative care at home. Beginning at the age of twelve months, the American Dental Association (ADA) recommends that children begin to visit the dentist for "well baby" checkups.

Diet
Provide children with a nourishing, well-balanced diet. Very sugary diets should be modified and continuous snacking discouraged. Space out snacks and provide non-sugary alternatives like celery sticks, carrot sticks, and low-fat yogurt.

Oral Habits
Though pacifier use and thumb sucking generally cease over time, both can cause teeth to misalign. Choose an "orthodontically" correct pacifier model. Oral habits should be targeted for cessation around 2-4 years old.

Brushing
Children's teeth should be brushed a minimum of two times per day using a soft bristled brush. Parents should help with brushing until the child reaches age seven. For babies, rub the gum area with a clean cloth after each feeding.

Flossing
Cavities and tooth decay form more easily between teeth. The child is at risk for cavities wherever two adjacent teeth touch. The dentist can help demonstrate correct positioning during flossing.


Dental Emergencies
Although dental injuries and emergencies are often distressing, they are extremely common. Approximately one third of children have experienced some type of dental trauma. There are two peak risk periods: toddlerhood (18-40 months) and the preadolescent/adolescent period when sporting injuries become commonplace.

Toothache
Cleanse area with warm water, check for impacted food, apply cold compress, contact dentist.

Knocked-Out Tooth
Recover the tooth (handle crown only, not roots). Rinse with water. For older children, reinsert in socket or place in cheek. For younger children, submerge in milk or saliva. Visit dentist immediately – time is critical!

Crown Fracture
Rinse mouth with warm water, place cold compress, offer pain relief, visit dentist. Any change in tooth color is an emergency warning sign.

For head trauma or fractured jaw, proceed immediately to the Emergency Room. For severe bleeding that doesn't stop with pressure, call a medical professional immediately.


Teeth Grinding (Bruxism)
Bruxism, or the grinding of teeth, is remarkably common in children and adults. A wide range of psychological, physiological, and physical factors may lead children to brux. In particular, jaw misalignment (bad bite), stress, and traumatic brain injury are all thought to contribute to bruxism.

Symptoms of Bruxism:
•
Frequent complaints of headache
•
Injured teeth and gums
•
Loud grinding or clicking sounds
•
Rhythmic tightening or clenching of jaw muscles
•
Painful jaw muscles, especially in the morning
•
Unusual tooth sensitivity to hot and cold foods
Bruxing spontaneously ceases by the age of thirteen in the majority of children. In the meantime, the dentist will continually monitor its effect on the child's teeth and may provide an interventional strategy.

Treatment options include: correcting misaligned teeth, stress reduction, relaxation classes, muscle relaxants, or a specialized nighttime mouth guard to prevent grinding damage.


Early Orthodontic Treatment
Orthodontic treatment is primarily used to prevent and correct "bite" irregularities. Crooked teeth hamper self-esteem and make good oral homecare difficult, whereas straight teeth help minimize the risk of tooth decay and childhood periodontal disease.

Children should have an initial orthodontic evaluation before the age of eight.

Benefits of Early Treatment:
•
Enhanced self-confidence and esthetic appearance
•
Increased likelihood of proper jaw growth
•
Increased likelihood of properly aligned adult teeth
•
Reduced risk of bruxing (grinding of teeth)
•
Reduced risk of childhood cavities and periodontal disease
•
Reduced risk of protracted orthodontic treatments in later years
Bring Your Child for a Visit!
Schedule your child's dental appointment today. We provide gentle, comprehensive care for patients of all ages.

Call (916) 626-4050
Heritage Oak Dental - Dentist in Rocklin CA
Your trusted family dentist in Rocklin, CA providing comprehensive dental care for patients of all ages.

3700 Atherton Rd
Rocklin, CA 95765
(916) 626-4050
contactus@heritageoakdental.com
Mon-Thu: 7:30AM-6PM
Fri: 8AM-4PM*
Quick Links
Home
About Our Dentists
Dental Services
Contact Us
FAQ
Patient Resources
Savings Plan
Our Services
General Dentistry
Cosmetic Dentistry
Dental Implants
Orthodontics
Pediatric Dentistry
Oral Surgery
Sedation Dentistry
Periodontics
Connect With Us
Serving
Rocklin • Roseville • Granite Bay • Lincoln • Loomis • Auburn • Citrus Heights

© 2026 Heritage Oak Dental. All rights reserved.

Heritage Oak Dental • 3700 Atherton Rd, Rocklin, CA 95765 • (916) 626-4050

Web presence created by GreyWhale