Heritage Oak Dental
Home
About
Resources
Specials
Services
Call (916) 626-4050
Home
/
Services
/
Implant Dentistry
Dental Implants in Rocklin, CA
The most sophisticated solution for replacing missing teeth with natural-looking, long-lasting results

A dental implant is a "root" device, usually made of titanium, used in dentistry to support restorations that resemble a tooth or group of teeth to replace missing teeth.

The bone of the jaw accepts and is osseointegrated with the titanium post. Dental implants can be used to support a number of dental prostheses, including crowns, implant-supported bridges or dentures. While high-tech in nature, dental implants are actually more tooth-saving than traditional bridgework, since implants do not rely on neighboring teeth for support.

Why Choose Dental Implants?
Dental implants are so natural-looking and feeling, you may forget you ever lost a tooth. You know that your confidence about your teeth affects how you feel about yourself, both personally and professionally. Perhaps you hide your smile because of spaces from missing teeth. Maybe your dentures don't feel secure. Perhaps you have difficulty chewing.

If you are missing one or more teeth and would like to smile, speak and eat again with comfort and confidence, there is good news! Dental implants are teeth that can look and feel just like your own! Under proper conditions and diligent patient maintenance, implants can last a lifetime.

Advantages of Dental Implants Over Dentures or a Bridge
Esthetic
Dental implants look and feel like your own teeth! Since dental implants integrate into the structure of your bone, they prevent the bone loss and gum recession that often accompany bridgework and dentures. No one will ever know that you have a replacement tooth.

Tooth Saving
Dental implants don't sacrifice the quality of your adjacent teeth like a bridge does because neighboring teeth are not altered to support the implant. More of your own teeth are left untouched, a significant long-term benefit to your oral health!

Confidence
Dental implants will allow you to once again speak and eat with comfort and confidence! They are secure and offer freedom from the irksome clicks and wobbles of dentures. Say goodbye to worries about misplaced dentures and messy pastes and glues.

Reliable
The success rate of dental implants is highly predictable. They are considered an excellent option for tooth replacement.

Are You a Candidate for Dental Implants?
The ideal candidate for a dental implant is in good general and oral health. Adequate bone in your jaw is needed to support the implant, and the best candidates have healthy gum tissues that are free of periodontal disease.

Dental implants are intimately connected with the gum tissues and underlying bone in the mouth. Patients are not candidates for implant procedures with uncontrolled systemic or localized disease processes. Implants are considered an elective procedure and therefore come secondary to your health.

Treatment Options
Single Missing Tooth
If you are missing a single tooth, one implant and a crown can replace it. A dental implant replaces both the lost natural tooth and its root. Single tooth implants are strong, require less care than dentures, and look and feel natural. With new techniques and proper case selection, you may be a candidate for immediate implant placement. You don't have to go a day without your tooth.

Multiple Missing Teeth
If you are missing several teeth, implant-supported bridges can replace them. Dental implants will replace both your lost natural teeth and some of the roots. When more than one tooth is missing, the benefits of implant supported teeth are even more obvious compared to traditional tooth supported bridges or removable partial dentures.

Complete Denture / All Teeth Missing
If you are missing all of your teeth, an implant-supported full bridge or full denture can replace them. An implant-supported denture is more stable than a regular denture. You will find it easier to speak and you won't have to worry about the denture becoming loose or falling out of your mouth.

Two types available: Bar-retained dentures (a thin metal bar attached to 2-5 implants) and Ball-retained dentures (each implant holds a ball-shaped metal attachment that fits into sockets on the denture).

Advanced Procedures
Sinus Augmentation
A key to implant success is the quantity and quality of the bone where the implant is to be placed. Sinus augmentation can help correct insufficient bone by raising the sinus floor and developing bone for the placement of dental implants.

Ridge Modification
Deformities in the upper or lower jaw can leave you with inadequate bone. The defect is filled with bone or bone substitute to build up the ridge. Ridge modification has been shown to greatly improve appearance and increase your chances for successful implants.

Suffering from Poor Fitting Dentures?
Many denture wearers are unable to enjoy the simple pleasures of life. Chewing becomes difficult and frustrating. Diet will consist mainly of soft foods that lack nutrients and fiber. Loose or ill-fitting partials or dentures can also affect your general health. Many traditional denture wearers mumble or slur their words due to slipping from ill-fitting devices or lack of bone support.

Dental implants can restore the quality of life for people who wear dentures. The boost in self-esteem and confidence that accompany a smile restored with dental implants can drastically improve the overall health of patients who previously suffered from loose or ill-fitting partials or dentures.

What Can I Expect After Treatment?
As you know, your own teeth require conscientious at-home oral care and regular dental visits. Dental implants are like your own teeth and will require the same care. In order to keep your implant clean and plaque-free, brushing and flossing still apply!

After treatment, we will develop the best care plan for you. Periodic follow-up visits will be scheduled to monitor your implant, teeth and gums to make sure they are healthy.

Are Implants for Everyone?
Dental implants are popular among dentists and are usually the recommended choice for the replacement of missing teeth. They provide a long-term solution unlike dentures and fixed bridges, which may need to be replaced over time. Dental implants can last a lifetime if maintained well. However, dental implants are not suitable for everyone:

•
Implants require strong bone support. People with bone loss may need additional bone grafting surgery
•
Children and teenagers are rarely considered because they are not finished growing
•
People with uncontrolled systemic or localized diseases need to be managed before implants
•
Heavy smokers and alcohol drinkers have a higher failure rate
•
Implants require regular cleaning and care to prevent infection
Know What You're Paying For
At Heritage Oak Dental we offer a wide array of dental implant treatment plans that are designed to fit your dental and financial needs. We don't offer a one size fits all treatment and involve you in the selection of the design, materials, and restorative treatment modalities.

Here are specific factors that directly alter the cost of treatment:

Bone grafting
Soft tissue grafting and contouring
The number of implants placed
The number of teeth replaced
Restorative material for the teeth
Supporting structural material
Substructure materials
Patient expectations
Long Term Care
Just like the tires on your car and roof over your head, nothing lasts forever and everything requires maintenance. We recommend that you have your treatment completed by people who you trust, stand by their work, and will be around to provide you the service to keep your dental implants healthy. At Heritage Oak Dental we provide long term maintenance and know what it takes to care for your implant from the placement throughout the rest of your life.

Ready to Restore Your Smile?
Schedule a consultation to learn more about dental implants and whether they're right for you.

Call (916) 626-4050
Heritage Oak Dental - Dentist in Rocklin CA
Your trusted family dentist in Rocklin, CA providing comprehensive dental care for patients of all ages.

3700 Atherton Rd
Rocklin, CA 95765
(916) 626-4050
contactus@heritageoakdental.com
Mon-Thu: 7:30AM-6PM
Fri: 8AM-4PM*
Quick Links
Home
About Our Dentists
Dental Services
Contact Us
FAQ
Patient Resources
Savings Plan
Our Services
General Dentistry
Cosmetic Dentistry
Dental Implants
Orthodontics
Pediatric Dentistry
Oral Surgery
Sedation Dentistry
Periodontics
Connect With Us
Serving
Rocklin • Roseville • Granite Bay • Lincoln • Loomis • Auburn • Citrus Heights

© 2026 Heritage Oak Dental. All rights reserved.

Heritage Oak Dental • 3700 Atherton Rd, Rocklin, CA 95765 • (916) 626-4050

Web presence created by GreyWhale