Heritage Oak Dental
Home
About
Resources
Specials
Services
Call (916) 626-4050
Home
/
Services
/
Sedation Dentistry
Sedation Dentistry in Rocklin, CA
Relax and feel comfortable during your dental visit with safe, effective sedation options

The overwhelming fear of dental appointments can be a common cause of anxiety. Many people visualize a drill-wielding man in a white coat just waiting to cause pain and remove teeth. The reality, however, is very different.

The comfort, relaxation and happiness of the patient are embedded deep at the heart of any good dental practice. The staff at the practice will do whatever they can to reduce anxiety, allay fears and provide painless, quick treatments.

Modern Dental Technology
Recent technological advancements have meant that in many cases, dentists are able to replace noisy drills with painless laser beams. There are also a wide variety of safe anesthetics available to eliminate pain and reduce anxiety during routine appointments.

Common Dental Fears
Fear of embarrassment about the condition of teeth

Fear of gagging

Fear of injections

Fear of loss of control

Fear of not becoming numb when injected with Novocain

Fear of pain

Fear of waking up from sedation during a procedure

Fear of the dentist as a person

Fear of the hand piece (or the drill)

Don't Let Fear Keep You Away
Dental anxiety and fear can become completely overwhelming. It is estimated that as many as 35 million people do not visit the dental office at all because they are too afraid.

Receiving regular dental check ups and cleanings is incredibly important. Having regular routine check ups is the easiest way to maintain excellent oral hygiene and reduce the need for more complex treatments.

Safety & Monitoring
Here are some tips to help reduce dental fear and anxiety:

Talk to the Dentist
The dentist is not a mind reader. Though it can be hard to talk about irrational fears with a stranger, the dentist can take extra precautions during visits if fears and anxiety are communicated.

Bring a Portable Music Player
Music acts as a relaxant and also drowns out any fear-producing noises. Listening to calming music throughout the appointment will help to reduce anxiety.

Agree on a Signal
Many people are afraid that the dentist will not know they are in significant pain during the appointment. The best way to solve this problem is to agree on a "stop" hand signal with the dentist. Both parties can easily understand signals like raising the hand or tapping on the chair.

Spray the Throat
Throat sprays (for example, Vicks® Chloraseptic® Throat Spray) can actually control the gag reflex. Two or three sprays will usually keep the reflex under control for about an hour.

Take a Mirror
Not being able to see what is happening can increase anxiety and make the imagination run wild. Watching the procedure can help keep reality at the forefront of the mind.

Sedation
If there is no other way to cope, sedation offers an excellent option for many people. There are several types of sedation, but the general premise behind them is the same: the patient regains their faculties after treatment is complete but requires a designated driver in order to leave the office as operating heavy equipment is out of the option.

Ask About Alternatives
Advances in technology mean that dental microsurgery is now an option. Lasers can be used to prepare teeth for fillings, whiten teeth and remove staining. Discuss all the options with the dentist and decide on one that is effective and produces minimal anxiety.

Reduce Anxiety
Feel relaxed and comfortable during your dental procedure with safe sedation options

Safe & Effective
Modern sedation techniques are carefully monitored and incredibly safe

Your Comfort First
Our team is dedicated to making your experience as comfortable as possible

Ready for a Stress-Free Dental Visit?
Talk to us about sedation options and how we can make your next appointment comfortable and anxiety-free.

Call (916) 626-4050
Heritage Oak Dental - Dentist in Rocklin CA
Your trusted family dentist in Rocklin, CA providing comprehensive dental care for patients of all ages.

3700 Atherton Rd
Rocklin, CA 95765
(916) 626-4050
contactus@heritageoakdental.com
Mon-Thu: 7:30AM-6PM
Fri: 8AM-4PM*
Quick Links
Home
About Our Dentists
Dental Services
Contact Us
FAQ
Patient Resources
Savings Plan
Our Services
General Dentistry
Cosmetic Dentistry
Dental Implants
Orthodontics
Pediatric Dentistry
Oral Surgery
Sedation Dentistry
Periodontics
Connect With Us
Serving
Rocklin • Roseville • Granite Bay • Lincoln • Loomis • Auburn • Citrus Heights

© 2026 Heritage Oak Dental. All rights reserved.

Heritage Oak Dental • 3700 Atherton Rd, Rocklin, CA 95765 • (916) 626-4050

Web presence created by GreyWhale