Heritage Oak Dental
Home
About
Resources
Specials
Services
Call (916) 626-4050
Composite Fillings
Tooth-colored fillings that restore and beautify your smile

A composite is a tooth colored filling that is used to repair a tooth that is affected by decay, cracks, fractures, etc. The decayed or affected portion of the tooth will be removed and then filled with a composite filling.

There are many types of filling materials available, each with their own advantages and disadvantages. You and your dentist can discuss the best options for restoring your teeth. Composite fillings, along with silver fillings, are the most widely used today. Because composite fillings are tooth colored, they can be closely matched to the color of existing teeth, and are more aesthetically suited for use in front teeth or the more visible areas of the teeth.

As with most dental restorations, composite fillings are not permanent and may someday have to be replaced. They are very durable, and will last many years, giving you a long lasting, beautiful smile.

Reasons for composite fillings:
•
Chipped teeth
•
Closing space between two teeth
•
Cracked or broken teeth
•
Decayed teeth
•
Worn teeth
How Are Composite Fillings Placed?
Composite fillings are usually placed in one appointment. While the tooth is numb, your dentist will remove decay as necessary. The space will then be thoroughly cleaned and carefully prepared before the new filling is placed. If the decay was near the nerve of the tooth, a special medication will be applied for added protection. The composite filling will then be precisely placed, shaped, and polished, restoring your tooth to its original shape and function.

It is normal to experience sensitivity to hot and cold when composite fillings are first placed, however this will subside shortly after your tooth acclimates to the new filling. After any trauma has been sustained by the tooth it is possible the tooth will need a root canal in the future. This includes but is not limited to cavities, drilling, polishing, wear, or facial accident.

You will be given care instructions at the conclusion of your treatment. Good oral hygiene practices, eating habits, and regular dental visits will aid in the life of your new fillings. The best filling is no filling at all.

Schedule Your Appointment
Contact us today to learn more about composite fillings and how they can restore your smile.

Call (916) 626-4050
Heritage Oak Dental - Dentist in Rocklin CA
Your trusted family dentist in Rocklin, CA providing comprehensive dental care for patients of all ages.

3700 Atherton Rd
Rocklin, CA 95765
(916) 626-4050
contactus@heritageoakdental.com
Mon-Thu: 7:30AM-6PM
Fri: 8AM-4PM*
Quick Links
Home
About Our Dentists
Dental Services
Contact Us
FAQ
Patient Resources
Savings Plan
Our Services
General Dentistry
Cosmetic Dentistry
Dental Implants
Orthodontics
Pediatric Dentistry
Oral Surgery
Sedation Dentistry
Periodontics
Connect With Us
Serving
Rocklin • Roseville • Granite Bay • Lincoln • Loomis • Auburn • Citrus Heights

© 2026 Heritage Oak Dental. All rights reserved.

Heritage Oak Dental • 3700 Atherton Rd, Rocklin, CA 95765 • (916) 626-4050

Web presence created by GreyWhale